New blog post: The Curious Case of a Service-level Objective (#309)
coveo/source.coveo.com: _posts/2024-07-16-the-curious-case-of-a-service-level-objective.md

---
layout: post

title: "The Curious Case of a Service-level Objective"

tags: [SLO, Service-level objective, SLI, Service-level indicator, SRE, Site reliability engineering, Prometheus, AWS Cloudwatch]

author:
  name: Jean-François Smith
  bio: Senior Software Developer
  image: jfsmith.jpeg
---

## The context

> The site reliability engineering (SRE) team at Coveo is currently hard at work implementing tools and processes with a lofty goal in mind: moving our R&D culture toward adopting service-level objectives (SLO). Writing blogs about SLOs or announcing products making use of them is pretty common nowadays, and understandably so. Yet I’m finding that most of the discourse around this topic is limited to the same kind of examples and use cases. In this blog post, I will tell the convoluted story of a definitely non-standard SLO.

Reviewer: Just a note like this 
> Coveo is currently hard at work implementing tools and processes with a lofty goal in mind: moving our R&D culture toward adopting service-level objectives (SLO).

Gives me the feeling that there was nothing else in place at Coveo to make sure that we were monitoring our system? I wish there was a way to say that on top of what we have, we are also using SLO, or standardizing on SLO accross the board, etc.

Does it make sense?

Author: It absolutely does. What about: moving our existing monitoring culture in R&D toward the systematical use of SLOs?

> The site reliability engineering (SRE) team at Coveo is currently hard at work implementing tools and processes with a lofty goal in mind: moving our R&D culture toward adopting service-level objectives (SLO). Writing blogs about SLOs or announcing products making use of them is pretty common nowadays, and understandably so. Yet I’m finding that most of the discourse around this topic is limited to the same kind of examples and use cases. In this blog post, I will tell the convoluted story of a definitely non-standard SLO.

Reviewer: Not sure about the "non-standard" SLO -> it's technically part of the ones described by google, so it can't be that non-standard?

Maybe "less common" or "less popular" ?

Author: I see what you are getting at. Google describes _a standard_, but the _standard practice_ only matches a small part of that. My use of "non-standard" referred to the latter, not the former. What about: unconventional?

Reviewer: perf.

The vast majority of platforms range between exclusively documenting request-driven availability and latency SLOs and exclusively supporting them. Sloth’s documentation [examples](https://sloth.dev/examples/default/getting-started/), for instance, only mention these common SLIs. Its list of [plugins](https://github.com/slok/sloth-common-sli-plugins) is even more telling. It is no surprise then that [Pyrra](https://github.com/pyrra-dev/pyrra), another tool built on top of Prometheus, only supports availability and latency. I will come back to Prometheus later in this blog post, but in the meantime let’s appreciate how even Google Cloud’s [documentation](https://cloud.google.com/stackdriver/docs/solutions/slo-monitoring) only mentions the same two SLIs/SLOs. Which kind of SLOs does AWS Cloudwatch’s new Application Signals support out-of-the-box? You may take a wild guess, and then see the answer down at point 5d in the relevant [documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonCloudWatch/latest/monitoring/CloudWatch-ServiceLevelObjectives.html#CloudWatch-ServiceLevelObjectives-Create).

> While I do understand the gravitational pull that application availability and latency SLOs may have, a cynical side of me fears that we are witnessing a bit of a bandwagon effect going on here. Fair enough. Our requirement for a freshness SLO is clear and if we need to cook up our own recipe for it, then we shall do so.

Reviewer: Is it really a bandwagon effect, or is it only a matter that tracking freshness is less common / more usecase dependent therefore, no generic tool exists?

Author: Fact of the matter is, generic offerings (like AWS or GCP) are still overly specific where they don't need to be. It's just a feeling (similar to the vibe I got when I researched chaos engineering back before th epandemic) and I _am_ consciously editorializing. I can remove that if you prefer.

|:--:|
| _Same data but in AWS Cloudwatch_ |

I mentioned above that Cloudwatch recently added a new SLO feature, through Application Signals. This new service automatically collects your application metrics and allows you to define SLIs and SLOs on top of that. This is not our use case but, thankfully, it also supports SLOs based on any custom metric! The move to Cloudwatch thus felt quite timely. However, this feature is so fresh from the oven that it is not particularly versatile. For example, it does not track burn rate (which is a very valuable target for alerting, a strategy that Google is quite [keen](https://sre.google/workbook/alerting-on-slos/) on), nor can we easily set multiple alerting thresholds or windows. To achieve the latter, we would have to create multiple SLOs on top of the same metric (our SLI), each with its own single window and alert. This is impractical, without even going into the kind of virtuoso implementations involving proper [multi-window, multi-burn-rate](https://sre.google/workbook/alerting-on-slos/#6-multiwindow-multi-burn-rate-alerts) alerting.

> A reasonable requirement is that we can enjoy alerting features on par with our SLOs in Honeycomb: at least one burn rate alert (*i.e.* when the error budget is being drained too fast) and at least one budget exhaustion alert (*i.e.* the remaining error budget is too low). What can we do then, short of calculating the SLOs ourselves?

Author: That's French. I will remove the italics.

We turn to implementing Google’s very own [slo-generator](https://github.com/google/slo-generator). This Python tool does exactly what we need: measuring SLI compliance and computing error budget and burn rate. I bundled this tool in a new AWS Lambda function, alongside a custom backend class for pulling our data from Cloudwatch. It then did its magic by pushing its results to our Prometheus stack, as it is one of slo-generator’s default exporters. Witnessing our first SLI measurement live was quite satisfying:

| ![Push indexing delay in AWS CLoudwatch](/images/2024-07-16-the-curious-case-of-a-service-level-objective/03_pushgateway.png) |
|:--:|
| _An SLI calculation sent to Prometheus. 99.96% is not bad at all!_ |

> As a famished philosopher once said, however, there’s no such thing as a free lunch. This solution requires us to use Prometheus Pushgateway, which was kindly installed by our infrastructure team for the sake of this proof of concept. The one important thing to know about Pushgateway is that its documentation begins by telling us when [not to use it](https://github.com/prometheus/pushgateway?tab=readme-ov-file#non-goals) (see also [here](https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/pushing/)). This literal warning sign is not trivial. Prometheus works best by pulling (or scraping) data. This should not be surprising when the application metrics it collects are in effect bound to the instances that run that application. Our indexing metric here is independent of that, though, and in fact this is precisely the only acceptable use case for Pushgateway. Yet the fact remains that Pushgateway is not a metrics backend – it is merely a metrics cache. This comes with its own sets of caveats and challenges. Did we really need to burden ourselves with them?

Reviewer: Link to Prometheus Pushgateway

We did not! As I could add a custom backend to slo-generator, so could I add a custom exporter redirecting all its calculation results to Cloudwatch itself instead. Thus the same AWS lambda function I created simply pushed back its results to the same backend as its source data.

| ![Push indexing delay in AWS CLoudwatch](/images/2024-07-16-the-curious-case-of-a-service-level-objective/04_cw.png) |
|:--:|
| _Indexing a Push document should take less than 7 minutes, 99% of the time within 24 hours. 6 bad events affected our error budget somewhat, but thankfully our compliance is still above 99%! (This data is from our development environment only)_ |

> The benefit of using Cloudwatch as a backend for our custom SLO – let’s not be shy about it – is that we can potentially re-use this data in many other ways, not just within AWS Cloudwatch. This is why I was able add one last column to the edifice: a custom Prometheus collector/exporter that can pull our SLO data (as it should be) so that in the end, we get the same result as if we were using Pushgateway, without the hassle of maintaining it. This way, we can enjoy Grafana’s powerful visualization tools, though of course the actual graphs shown below remain quite simple for the time being:

Reviewer 2: I was able to add (missing to)

| ![Push indexing delay in AWS CLoudwatch](/images/2024-07-16-the-curious-case-of-a-service-level-objective/05_grafana.png) |
|:--:|
| _Our now familiar Push freshness SLO, here shown in Grafana, collected through Prometheus (again, all data is from our development environment only)_ |

And so here we are! A fully functional freshness SLO, built up from several individual smaller pieces.

## The upshot

For sure, our end game is going through a lot of hoops, but let’s revisit our requirements:

- Ability to push custom metrics to a backend

> - Ability to compute SLI compliance, error budget and burn rate on which we can alert

Reviewer 2: missing Oxford comma

- Ability to store this SLO data in a reliable backend

Using an efficient but generic tool, Google’s slo-generator, alongside AWS Cloudwatch and Lambda functions is all that it took in the end. The road to get there was certainly not a straightforward one -- this post only describes the result, sparing you from the many different iterations of this proof of concept. But I do hope the retained solution offers a proper way forward for all kinds of unconventional (but legitimate) SLOs we can come up with here at Coveo.

One of my favorite benefits of using Google’s slo-generator is how SLOs are defined through a YAML spec. I did not have the space to dwell on that here, but this is one of the areas I really want to exploit further down the line. As we already support Honeycomb SLOs as code (in this case, Terraform), I am hoping that eventually we can make all our SLOs uniform through a shared specification language, such as [OpenSLO](https://github.com/openslo/openslo). I firmly believe this will be of great help not only to drive, but also to scale up our adoption of SLOs. So until then, [may your queries flow and the pagers stay silent](https://sre.google/workbook/conclusion/)!

> 

Reviewer 2: Would you mind adding this at the end?

`If you're passionate about software engineering, and you would like to work with other developers who are passionate about their work, make sure to check out our [careers](https://www.coveo.com/en/company/careers/open-positions?utm_source=tech-blog&utm_medium=blog-post&utm_campaign=organic#t=career-search&numberOfResults=9) page and apply to join the team!`

Author: Sure! Added in italics to separate this kind of "postscript" from the blog post itself.

---
layout: post

title: "The Curious Case of a Service-level Objective"

tags: [SLO, Service-level objective, SLI, Service-level indicator, SRE, Site reliability engineering, Prometheus, AWS Cloudwatch]

author:
  name: Jean-François Smith
  bio: Senior Software Developer
  image: jfsmith.jpeg
---

> # The context

Reviewer 3: You're using a `h1` here but I believe that you should be using an `h2` instead. That is:

```suggestion
## The context
```

I believe that this is the case for all your other headings. 

Normally in HTML, you want your headings to be nested where you have a single h1 at the top and then a tree of h2, h3, etc. I'm not 100% sure on how our blog setup works but usually these tools take your title and generate it as an `h1` from there all your other headings should be at least `h2`.

Author: I checked the latest blog post and it uses h1. I did not check the other ones, which do use h2. :facepalm: The styling is a bit weird here because h1 in the text is not the same size as the title of the post at the top. I do agree that the semantics would require h2 though. I'll fix that.

> The site reliability engineering (SRE) team at Coveo is currently hard at work implementing tools and processes with a lofty goal in mind: moving our R&D culture toward adopting service-level objectives (SLO). Writing blogs about SLOs or announcing products making use of them is pretty common nowadays, and understandably so. Yet I’m finding that most of the discourse around this topic is limited to the same kind of examples and use cases. In this blog post, I will tell the convoluted story of a definitely not standard SLO.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The site reliability engineering (SRE) team at Coveo is currently hard at work implementing tools and processes with a lofty goal in mind: moving our R&D culture toward adopting service-level objectives (SLO). Writing blogs about SLOs or announcing products making use of them is pretty common nowadays, and understandably so. Yet I’m finding that most of the discourse around this topic is limited to the same kind of examples and use cases. In this blog post, I will tell the convoluted story of a definitely non-standard SLO.
```

<!-- more -->

> But first, a refresher. What is an SLO? A service-level objective is an acceptability threshold relating to the performance of a service. This concept also has an inseparable twin, the service-level indicator or SLI. The SLI is a measurement of a service’s behavior expressed as the frequency of some successful state or result. For example, the number of requests that return HTTP 200 OK responses; or the number of jobs that completed within 5 minutes. A simple guidance to ensure that your SLI is expressed in this conventional way is that your measurement is an unequivocal yes/no or true/false proposition. Did a response return a 200 OK? Did a job complete within 5 minutes? The acceptable ratio of good/bad answers to these questions, within a predetermined time window, is your SLO. For example, you may declare that 99.9% of your requests in the last 24h should return 200 OK; or that 95% of the jobs within the last 28 days should complete within 5 minutes. SLOs such as these are much more than mere monitoring redlines on a dashboard. They are, in essence, quality pledges to your customers.

Reviewer 4: Consider showing the formula? Some are more visual than others.

Author: You mean like we used in our slides in the primer video we did this winter?

Author: Oh I think I should use the formulas from here -> https://github.com/google/slo-generator?tab=readme-ov-file#description 

what do you think?

Up until now at Coveo our implementation of SLOs has leveraged Honeycomb, which uses [distributed tracing](https://docs.honeycomb.io/get-started/basics/observability/concepts/distributed-tracing/#what-is-a-trace) to propel request observability to impressive heights. Using this data, setting up availability and latency SLOs is not only easy, but also quite appropriate. Thanks to its almost limitless cardinality, drilling down into traces and cross-associating multiple properties allow for very deep investigations.

It turns out however that the SRE team has a very different kind of SLO on its hands, the implementation of which has been the opposite of straightforward. Here is why.

# The problem

> Since around the year -2 BC (Before Covid), I have been maintaining a metric that tracks how long it takes for a simple document to go through our indexing pipeline after being either pushed by API or pulled by what we call a crawler. The idea behind this is to observe the health of the pipeline at a higher level. When this simple document takes too long to index and become available for querying, chances are that this is indicative of a problem for everyone else too. In theory, this metric is nothing less than perfect for a SLO. In practice, however, reality begged to differ.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Since around the year -2 BC (Before Covid), I have been maintaining a metric that tracks how long it takes for a simple document to go through our indexing pipeline after being either pushed by API or pulled by what we call a crawler. The idea behind this is to observe the health of the pipeline at a higher level. When this simple document takes too long to index and become available for querying, chances are there is a problem somewhere in the pipeline that should be investigated. In theory, this metric is nothing less than perfect for a SLO. In practice, however, reality begged to differ.
```

Author: Can I ask what is your intent with the suggestion? So that I understand better what I might change. I really prefer my wording but I can certainly meet you halfway somewhere (I would at least switch to using the active voice). :sweat_smile:

> Since around the year -2 BC (Before Covid), I have been maintaining a metric that tracks how long it takes for a simple document to go through our indexing pipeline after being either pushed by API or pulled by what we call a crawler. The idea behind this is to observe the health of the pipeline at a higher level. When this simple document takes too long to index and become available for querying, chances are that this is indicative of a problem for everyone else too. In theory, this metric is nothing less than perfect for a SLO. In practice, however, reality begged to differ.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since around the year 2 BC (Before Covid), I have been maintaining a metric that tracks how long it takes for a simple document to go through our indexing pipeline after being either pushed by API or pulled by what we call a crawler. The idea behind this is to observe the health of the pipeline at a higher level. When this simple document takes too long to index and become available for querying, chances are that this is indicative of a problem for everyone else too. In theory, this metric is nothing less than perfect for a SLO. In practice, however, reality begged to differ.
```

My understanding is that if you say 100 BCE that means 100 Before common era which would be -100 assuming 0 as the birth of jesus. To apply the same rules: 2 BC = 2018 while -2 BC is not common practice and would arguably mean 2022.

Author: LOL! That's so true. That's what happens when you try too hard to be a smartass.

We did not! As I could add a custom backend to slo-generator, so could I add a custom exporter redirecting all its calculation results to Cloudwatch itself instead. Thus the same AWS lambda function I created simply pushed back its results to the same backend as its source data.

| ![Push indexing delay in AWS CLoudwatch](/images/2024-07-16-the-curious-case-of-a-service-level-objective/04_cw.png) |
|:--:|
| _Indexing a Push document should take less than 7 minutes, 99% of the time within 24 hours. 6 bad events affected our error budget somewhat, but thankfully our compliance is still above 99%! (This data is from our development environment only)_ |

> The benefit of using Cloudwatch as a backend for our custom SLO – let’s not be shy about it – is that we can potentially re-use this data in many other ways, not just within AWS Cloudwatch. This is why I was able add one last column to the edifice: a custom Prometheus collector/exporter that can pull our SLO data (as it should be) so that in the end, we get the same result as if we were using Pushgateway, without the hassle of maintaining it. This way, we can enjoy Grafana’s powerful visualization tools, though of course the actual graphs shown below remains quite simple for the time being:

Reviewer 3: This question is less about this blog post and more about the custom exporter. Why not use the existing cloudwatch exporter that's widely used in coveo?

Author: Because I was told it's iffy, because at the same time Nic in Found team was having problems with it in the databases project, and I already had a copy-pastable example handy for a custom one. Just felt the best choice in the short term.

| ![Push indexing delay in AWS CLoudwatch](/images/2024-07-16-the-curious-case-of-a-service-level-objective/05_grafana.png) |
|:--:|
| _Our now familiar Push freshness SLO, here shown in Grafana, collected through Prometheus (again, all data is from our development environment only)_ |

And so here we are! A fully functional freshness SLO, built up from several individual smaller pieces.

# The upshot

For sure, our end game is going through a lot of hoops, but let’s revisit our requirements:

> - Ability to push gauge- and/or counter-style metrics to a backend

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Ability to push gauge and/or counter-style metrics to a backend
```

I'm not sure if this had a purpose but it feels like it was forgotten

Author: It wasn't forgotten. It just was implicit when comparing the metric to either Honeycomb or classic Prometheus. I will amend the text to be clearer.

Btw I do believe I can keep the hyphen after gauge, it's called a suspended hyphen (see https://www.scribbr.com/language-rules/hyphens/ under Suspended hyphen).

Author: Okay looking back at it, if feels too irrelevant to talk about the kind of metrics that are being pushed. The essence of the first requirement listed here is the push thing, not the metric style. It detracts from the rest of the discussion. I instead simply remove the gauge/counter mention altogether here. There's no gain.
